#### 7.2.2 Trial Elements (TE)

TE – Description/Overview

A trial design domain that contains the element code that is unique for each element, the element description, and the rules for starting and ending an element.

The Trial Elements (TE) dataset contains the definitions of the elements that appear in the Trial Arms (TA) dataset. An element may appear multiple times in the TA table because it appears either (1) in multiple arms, (2) multiple times within an arm, or (3) both. However, an element will appear only once in the TE table.

Each row in the TE dataset may be thought of as representing a "unique element" in the same sense of "unique" as a CRF template page for a collecting certain type of data referred to as "unique page." For instance, a CRF might be described as containing 87 pages, but only 23 unique pages. By analogy, the trial design matrix in Example Trial 1 (see Section 7.2.1, Trial Arms) has 9 study cells, each of which contains 1 element, but the same trial design

matrix contains only 5 unique elements, so the TE dataset for that trial has only 5 records.

An element is a building block for creating study cells, and an arm is composed of study cells. Or, from another point of view, an arm is composed of elements; that is, the trial design assigns subjects to arms, which comprise a sequence of steps called elements.

Trial elements represent an interval of time that serves a purpose in the trial and are associated with certain activities affecting the subject. “Week 2 to week 4” is not a valid element. A valid element has a name that describes the purpose of the element and includes a description of the activity or event that marks the subject's transition into the element as well as the conditions for leaving the element.

TE – Specification

te.xpt, Trial Elements — Trial Design. One record per planned Element, Tabulation.

| Variable Name | Variable Label              | Type | Controlled Terms, Codelist or Format1 | Role              | CDISC Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Core |
| ------------- | --------------------------- | ---- | ------------------------------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---- |
| STUDYID       | Study Identifier            | Char |                                       | Identifier        | Unique identifier for a study.                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Req  |
| DOMAIN        | Domain Abbreviation         | Char | TE                                    | Identifier        | Two-character abbreviation for the domain.                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Req  |
| ETCD          | Element Code                | Char | *                                     | Topic             | ETCD (the companion to ELEMENT) is limited to 8 characters and does not have special character restrictions. These values should be short for ease of use in programming, but it is not expected that ETCD will need to serve as a variable name. | Req  |
| ELEMENT       | Description of Element      | Char | *                                     | Synonym Qualifier | The name of the element.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Req  |
| TESTRL        | Rule for Start of Element   | Char |                                       | Rule              | Describes condition for beginning element.                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Req  |
| TEENRL        | Rule for End of Element     | Char |                                       | Rule              | Describes condition for ending element. Either TEENRL or TEDUR must be present for each element.                                                                                                                                                  | Perm |
| TEDUR         | Planned Duration of Element | Char | ISO 8601 duration                     | Timing            | Planned duration of element in ISO 8601 format. Used when the rule for ending the element is applied after a fixed duration.                                                                                                                      | Perm |

1In this column, an asterisk (*) indicates that the variable may be subject to controlled terminology. CDISC/NCI codelist values are enclosed in parentheses.

TE – Assumptions

1. There are no gaps between elements. The instant one element ends, the next element begins. A subject spends no time “between” elements.
2. The ELEMENT (Description of the Element) variable usually indicates the treatment being administered during an element, or, if no treatment is being administered, the other activities that are the purpose of this period of time (e.g., "Screening", "Follow-up", "Washout"). In some cases, this time period may be quite passive (e.g., "Rest"; "Wait, for disease episode").
3. The TESTRL (Rule for Start of Element) variable identifies the event that marks the transition into this element. For elements that involve treatment, this is the start of treatment.
4. For elements that do not involve treatment, TESTRL can be more difficult to define. For washout and follow-up elements, which always follow treatment elements, the start of the element may be defined relative to the end of a preceding treatment. For example, a washout period might be defined as starting 24 or 48 hours after the last dose of drug for the preceding treatment element or epoch. This definition is not totally independent of the TA dataset, because it relies on knowing where in the trial design the element is used, and that it always follows a treatment element. Defining a clear starting point for the start of a non- treatment element that always follows another non-treatment element can be particularly difficult. The transition may be defined by a decision-making activity such as enrollment or randomization. For example, every arm of a trial that involves treating disease episodes might start with a screening element followed by an element that consists of waiting until a disease episode occurs. The activity that marks the beginning of the wait element might be randomization.
5. TESTRL for a treatment element may be thought of as “active” whereas the start rule for a non-treatment element—particularly a follow-up or washout element—may be “passive.” The start of a treatment element will not occur until a dose is given, no matter how long that dose is delayed. Once the last dose is given, the start of a subsequent non-treatment element is inevitable, as long as another dose is not given.
6. Note that the date/time of the event described in TESTRL will be used to populate the date/times in the Subject Elements (SE) dataset, so the date/time of the event should be captured in the CRF.
7. Specifying TESTRL for an element that serves the first element of an arm in the TA dataset involves defining the start of the trial. In the examples in this document, obtaining informed consent has been used as "Trial Entry."
8. TESTRL should be expressed without referring to arm. If the element appears in more than 1 arm in the TA dataset, then the element description (ELEMENT) must not refer to any arms.
9. TESTRL should be expressed without referring to epoch. If the element appears in more than 1 epoch in the TA dataset, then the Element description (ELEMENT) must not refer to any epochs.
10. For a blinded trial, it is useful to describe TESTRL in terms that separate the properties of the event that are visible to blinded participants from the properties that are visible only to those who are unblinded. For treatment elements in blinded trials, wording such as the following is suitable: "First dose of study drug for a treatment epoch, where study drug is X."
11. Element end rules are rather different from element start rules. The actual end of one element is the beginning of the next element. Thus, the element end rule does not give the conditions under which an element does end, but the conditions under which it should end or is planned to end.
12. At least 1 of TEENRL and TEDUR must be populated. Both may be populated.
13. TEENRL describes the circumstances under which a subject should leave this element. Element end rules may depend on a variety of conditions. For instance, a typical criterion for ending a rest element between oncology chemotherapy-treatment element would be, “15 days after start of element and after WBC values have recovered." The TA dataset, not the TE dataset, describes where the subject moves next, so TEENRL must be expressed without referring to arm.
14. TEDUR serves the same purpose as TEENRL for the special (but very common) case of an element with a fixed duration. TEDUR is expressed in ISO 8601. For example, a TEDUR value of P6W is equivalent to a TEENRL of "6 weeks after the start of the element."
15. Note that elements that have different start and end rules are different elements and must have different values of ELEMENT and ETCD. For instance, elements that involve the same treatment but have different durations are different elements. The same applies to non-treatment elements. For instance, a washout with a fixed duration of 14 days is different from a washout that is to end after 7 days if drug cannot be detected in a blood sample, or after 14 days otherwise.

TE – Examples

Both of the trials in TA Examples 1 and 2 (see Section 7.2.1, Trial Arms) are assumed to have fixed-duration elements. The wording in TESTRL is intended to separate the description of the event that starts the element into the part that would be visible to a blinded participant in the trial (e.g., "First dose of a treatment epoch") from the part that is revealed when the study is unblinded (e.g., "where dose is 5 mg"). Care must be taken in choosing these descriptions to be sure that they are arm- and epoch-neutral. For instance, in a crossover trial such as TA Example Trial 3, where an element may appear in 1 of multiple epochs, the wording must be appropriate for all possible epochs (e.g., "OPEN LABEL TREATMENT"). The SDS Team is considering adding a separate variable to the TE dataset that would hold information on the treatment that is associated with an element. This would make it clearer which elements are "treatment elements” and, therefore, which epochs contain treatment elements and thus are "treatment Epochs."

Example 1

This example shows the TE dataset for TA Example Trial 1.

te.xpt

| Row | STUDYID | DOMAIN | ETCD | ELEMENT | TESTRL                                          | TEENRL                         | TEDUR |
| --- | ------- | ------ | ---- | ------- | ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----- |
| 1   | EX1     | TE     | SCRN | Screen  | Informed consent                                | 1 week after start of Element  | P7D   |
| 2   | EX1     | TE     | RI   | Run-In  | Eligibility confirmed                           | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 3   | EX1     | TE     | P    | Placebo | First dose of study drug, where drug is placebo | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 4   | EX1     | TE     | A    | Drug A  | First dose of study drug, where drug is Drug A  | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 5   | EX1     | TE     | B    | Drug B  | First dose of study drug, where drug is Drug B  | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |

Example 2

This example shows the TE dataset for TA Example Trial 2.

te.xpt

| Row | STUDYID | DOMAIN | ETCD | ELEMENT   | TESTRL                                                    | TEENRL                         | TEDUR |
| --- | ------- | ------ | ---- | --------- | --------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------ | ----- |
| 1   | EX2     | TE     | SCRN | Screen    | Informed consent                                          | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 2   | EX2     | TE     | P    | Placebo   | First dose of a treatment Epoch, where dose is placebo    | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 3   | EX2     | TE     | 5    | 5 mg      | First dose of a treatment Epoch, where dose is 5 mg drug  | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 4   | EX2     | TE     | 10   | 10 mg     | First dose of a treatment Epoch, where dose is 10 mg drug | 2 weeks after start of Element | P14D  |
| 5   | EX2     | TE     | REST | Rest      | 48 hrs after last dose of preceding treatment Epoch       | 1 week after start of Element  | P7D   |
| 6   | EX2     | TE     | FU   | Follow-up | 48 hrs after last dose of third treatment Epoch           | 3 weeks after start of Element | P21D  |

Example 3

The TE dataset for TA Example Trial 4 illustrates element end rules for elements that are not all of fixed duration. The screen element in this study can be up to 2 weeks long, but because it may end earlier it is not of fixed duration. The rest element has a variable length, depending on how quickly WBC recovers. Note that the start rules for the A and B elements have been written to be suitable for a blinded study.

te.xpt

| Row | STUDYID | DOMAIN | ETCD | ELEMENT   | TESTRL                                                     | TEENRL                                                                   | TEDUR |
| --- | ------- | ------ | ---- | --------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----- |
| 1   | EX4     | TE     | SCRN | Screen    | Informed Consent                                           | Screening assessments are complete, up to 2 weeks after start of Element |       |
| 2   | EX4     | TE     | A    | Trt A     | First dose of treatment Element, where drug is Treatment A | 5 days after start of Element                                            | P5D   |
| 3   | EX4     | TE     | B    | Trt B     | First dose of treatment Element, where drug is Treatment B | 5 days after start of Element                                            | P5D   |
| 4   | EX4     | TE     | REST | Rest      | Last dose of previous treatment cycle + 24 hrs             | At least 16 days after start of Element and WBC recovered                |       |
| 5   | EX4     | TE     | FU   | Follow-up | Decision not to treat further                              | 4 weeks                                                                  | P28D  |

##### 7.2.2.1 Trial Elements Issues

Granularity of Trial Elements

Deciding how finely to divide trial time when identifying trial elements is a matter of judgment, as illustrated by the following examples:

1. TA Example Trial 2 was represented using 3 treatment epochs separated by 2 washout epochs and followed

by a follow-up epoch. This might have been modeled using 3 treatment epochs that included both the 2- week treatment period and the 1-week rest period. Because the first week after the third treatment period would be included in the third treatment epoch, the follow-up epoch would then have a duration of 2 weeks.

2. In TA Example Trials 4, 5, and 6, separate treatment and rest elements were identified. However, the

combination of treatment and rest could be represented as a single element.

3. A trial might include a dose titration, with subjects receiving increasing doses on a weekly basis until

certain conditions are met. The trial design could be modeled in any of the following ways:

a. Using several 1-week elements at specific doses, followed by an element of variable length at the chosen dose

b. As a titration element of variable length followed by a constant dosing element of variable length

c. One element with dosing determined by titration.

The choice of elements used to represent this dose titration will depend on the objectives of the trial and how the data will be analyzed and reported. If it is important to examine side effects or lab values at each individual dose, the first model is appropriate. If it is important only to identify the time to completion of titration, the second model might be appropriate. If the titration process is routine and is of little interest, the third model might be adequate for the purposes of the trial.

Distinguishing Elements, Study Cells, and Epochs

It is easy to confuse elements, which are reusable trial building blocks, with study cells (which contain the elements for a particular epoch and Arm) and with epochs (which are time periods for the trial as a whole). In part, this is because many trials have epochs for which the same element appears in all arms. In other words, in the trial design matrix for many trials, there are columns (Epochs) in which all the study cells have the same contents. It also is natural to use the same name (e.g., screen, follow-up) for both such an epoch and the single element that appears within it.

Confusion can also arise from the fact that in the blinded treatment portions of blinded trials, blinded participants do not know which element a subject is in, but do know what epoch the subject is in.

In describing a trial, one way to avoid confusion between elements and epochs is to include "Element" or "Epoch" in the values of ELEMENT or EPOCH when these values (e.g., screening, follow-up) would otherwise be the same. It becomes tedious to do this in every case, but can be useful to resolve confusion when it arises or is likely to arise.

The difference between epoch and element is perhaps clearest in crossover trials. In TA Example Trial 2, as for most crossover trials, the analysis of pharmacokinetic (PK) results would include both treatment and period effects in the model. “Treatment effect” derives from element (placebo, 5 mg, 10 mg), whereas “period effect” derives from the epoch (first, second, or third treatment epoch).

Transitions Between Elements

The transition between one element and the next can be thought of as a 3-step process:

| Step | Step question                                       | How step question is answered by information in the TA datasets                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ---- | --------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1    | Should the subject leave the current element?       | The criteria for ending the current element are in TEENRL in the TE dataset.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| 2    | Which element should the subject enter next?        | If there is a branch point at this point in the trial, evaluate criteria described in TABRANCH (e.g., randomization results) in the TA dataset. Otherwise, if TATRANS in the TA dataset is populated in this arm at this point, follow those instructions. Otherwise, move to the next element in this arm as specified by TAETORD in the TA dataset. |
| 3    | What does the subject do to enter the next element? | The action or event that marks the start of the next element is specified in TESTRL in the TE dataset.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

Note that the subject is not "in limbo" during this process. The subject remains in the current element until step 3, at which point the subject transitions to the new element. There are no gaps between elements.

As illustrated in the table, executing a transition depends on information that is split between the TE and the TA datasets.

It can be useful, in the process of working out the Trial Design (TD) datasets, to create a dataset that supplements the TA dataset with the TESTRL, TEENRL, and TEDUR variables, so that full information on the transitions is easily accessible. However, such a working dataset is not an SDTM dataset, and should not be submitted.

The following table shows a fragment of such a table for TA Example Trial 4.

Note that

- for all records that contain a particular element, all the TE variable values are exactly the same; and
- when both TABRANCH and TATRANS are blank, the implicit decision in step 2 is that the subject moves to the next element in sequence for the arm.

special.xpt

| Row | ARM | EPOCH     | TAETORD | ELEMENT | TESTRL                                                        | TEENRL                                                                   | TEDUR | TABRANCH        | TATRANS                                       |
| --- | --- | --------- | ------- | ------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ----- | --------------- | --------------------------------------------- |
| 1   | A   | Screen    | 1       | Screen  | Informed Consent                                              | Screening assessments are complete, up to 2 weeks after start of Element |       | Randomized to A |                                               |
| 2   | A   | Treatment | 2       | Trt A   | First dose of treatment in Element, where drug is Treatment A | 5 days after start of Element                                            | P5D   |                 |                                               |
| 3   | A   | Treatment | 3       | Rest    | Last dose of previous treatment cycle + 24 hrs                | 16 days after start of Element and WBC recovers                          |       |                 | If disease progression, go to Follow-up Epoch |
| 4   | A   | Treatment | 4       | Trt A   | First dose of treatment in Element, where drug is Treatment A | 5 days after start of Element                                            | P5D   |                 |                                               |

Note that rows 2 and 4 of this dataset involve the same element (Trt A); thus, TESTRL is the same for both. The activity that marks a subject's entry into the fourth element in arm A is "First dose of treatment Element, where drug is Treatment A." This is not the subject's very first dose of treatment A, but it is their first dose in this element.
